Identification of a novel Drosophila SMAD on the X chromosome. TGF-beta signaling from the cell surface to the nucleus is mediated by the SMAD family of proteins, which have been grouped into three classes based upon sequence identity and function. Receptor-regulated, or pathway-restricted, SMADs (R-SMADs) are phosphorylated by ligand-specific serine/threonine kinase receptors. Phosphorylated R-SMADs oligomerize with the coactivating, or shared, SMAD (Co-SMAD) mediator and translocate to the nucleus where the complex directs transcription of downstream target genes. Inhibitory SMADs (I-SMADs) block receptor-mediated phosphorylation of R-SMADs. In Drosophila, one member of each class of SMAD has been reported: MAD, an R-SMAD, MEDEA, a Co-SMAD, and DAD, an I-SMAD. Here, we report the first identification of a novel Drosophila R-SMAD, which we have named Smox for Smad on X. We have localized the Smox gene to a specific interval on the X chromosome and shown that Smox is transcribed throughout development.
The Drosophila activin receptor baboon signals through dSmad2 and controls cell proliferation but not patterning during larval development. The TGF-beta superfamily of growth and differentiation factors, including TGF-beta, Activins and bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) play critical roles in regulating the development of many organisms. These factors signal through a heteromeric complex of type I and II serine/threonine kinase receptors that phosphorylate members of the Smad family of transcription factors, thereby promoting their nuclear localization. Although components of TGF-beta/Activin signaling pathways are well defined in vertebrates, no such pathway has been clearly defined in invertebrates. In this study we describe the role of Baboon (Babo), a type I Activin receptor previously called Atr-I, in Drosophila development and characterize aspects of the Babo intracellular signal-transduction pathway. Genetic analysis of babo loss-of-function mutants and ectopic activation studies indicate that Babo signaling plays a role in regulating cell proliferation. In mammalian cells, activated Babo specifically stimulates Smad2-dependent pathways to induce TGF-beta/Activin-responsive promoters but not BMP-responsive elements. Furthermore, we identify a new Drosophila Smad, termed dSmad2, that is most closely related to vertebrate Smads 2 and 3. Activated Babo associates with dSmad2 but not Mad, phosphorylates the carboxy-terminal SSXS motif and induces heteromeric complex formation with Medea, the Drosophila Smad4 homolog. Our results define a novel Drosophila Activin/TGF-beta pathway that is analogous to its vertebrate counterpart and show that this pathway functions to promote cellular growth with minimal effects on patterning.
Drosophila dSmad2 and Atr-I transmit activin/TGFbeta signals. Much is known about the three subfamilies of the TGFbeta superfamily in vertebrates-the TGFbetas, dpp/BMPs, and activins. Signalling in each subfamily is dependent on both shared and unique cell surface receptors and Smads. In invertebrates, mutants for BMP pathway components have been extensively characterized, but thus far, evidence for an activin- or TGFbeta-like pathway has been lacking, preventing the use of the extensive genetic tools available for studying several key issues of TGFbeta signalling. Here we report the identification of dSmad2, a new Drosophila Smad which is most related to the activin/TGFbeta-pathway Smads, Smad2 and Smad3. We show that dSmad2 induces activin responsive genes in Xenopus animal cap assays. dSMAD2 is phosphorylated by ATR-I and PUNT, but not by activated THICK VEINS, and translocates to the nucleus upon activation. Furthermore, we show that dSMAD2 complexes with MEDEA only in the presence of ATR-I and PUNT. dSmad2 is expressed in the imaginal disks and in the outer proliferation centre of the larval brain, suggesting that it may have important proliferative and patterning roles during Drosophila development. Our data provide evidence for the existence of an activin/TGFbeta pathway in Drosophila. We show that dSmad2 participates in this pathway, and that it functions with Atr-I and punt. We show that Medea also participates in this pathway, indicating the conservation of roles for Co-Smads in diverse phyla. Expression patterns of dSmad2 suggest that it functions in imaginal disks and in the brain, in tissues that undergo extensive patterning and proliferation.
TGF-beta family signal transduction in Drosophila development: from Mad to Smads. The transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) superfamily encompasses a large group of soluble extracellular proteins that are potent regulators of development in both vertebrates and invertebrates. Drosophila TGF-beta family members include three proteins with homology to vertebrate bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs): Decapentaplegic (Dpp), Screw, and Glass bottom boat-60A. Genetic studies of Dpp signaling led to the identification of Smad proteins as central mediators of signal transduction by TGF-beta family members. Work in mammalian tissue culture has elucidated a biochemical model for signal transduction, in which activation of receptor serine-threonine kinase activity leads to phosphorylation of specific Smad proteins and translocation of heteromeric Smad protein complexes to the nucleus. Once in the nucleus Smad proteins interact with other DNA binding proteins to regulate transcription of specific target genes. Dissection of Dpp-response elements from genes expressed during embryonic mesoderm patterning and midgut morphogenesis provides important insights into the contributions of Smad proteins and tissue-specific transcription factors to spatial regulation of gene expression. Genetic studies in Drosophila are now expanding to include multiple BMP ligands and receptors and have uncovered activities not explained by the current signal transduction model. Identification of more ligand sequences and demonstration of a functional Drosophila activin-like signal transduction pathway suggest that all TGF-beta signal transduction pathways are present in flies.
Genome-wide microarray analysis of TGFbeta signaling in the Drosophila brain. Members of TGFbeta superfamily are found to play important roles in many cellular processes, such as proliferation, differentiation, development, apoptosis, and cancer. In Drosophila, there are seven ligands that function through combinations of three type I receptors and two type II receptors. These signals can be roughly grouped into two major TGFbeta pathways, the dpp/BMP and activin pathways, which signal primarily through thick veins (tkv) and baboon (babo). Few downstream targets are known for either pathway, especially targets expressed in the Drosophila brain. tkv and babo both affect the growth of tissues, but have varying effects on patterning. We have identified targets for the tkv and babo pathways by employing microarray techniques using activated forms of the receptors expressed in the brain. In these experiments, we compare the similarities of target genes of these two pathways in the brain. About 500 of 13,500 examined genes changed expression at 95% confidence level (P < 0.05). Twenty-seven genes are co-regulated 1.5 fold by both the tkv and babo pathways. These regulated genes cluster into various functional groups such as DNA/RNA binding, signal transducers, enzymes, transcription regulators, and neuronal regulators. RNAi knockdown experiments of homologs of several of these genes show abnormal growth regulation, suggesting these genes may execute the growth properties of TGFbeta ur genomic-wide microarray analysis has revealed common targets for the tkv and babo pathways and provided new insights into downstream effectors of two distinct TGFbeta like pathways. Many of these genes are novel and several genes are implicated in growth control. Among the genes regulated by both pathways is ultraspiracle, which further connects TGFbeta with neuronal remodeling.
Transforming growth factor beta signaling mediators and modulators. Transforming growth factor beta is a multi-functional growth and differentiation factor responsible for regulating many diverse biological processes in both vertebrate and invertebrate species. Among the most dramatic of TGFbeta's effects are those associated with specification of cell fates during development and inhibition of cell cycle progression. The core TGFbeta signaling pathway has now been described using a synergistic combination of genetic and biochemical approaches. Transmembrane receptors with intrinsic protein serine kinase activity bind ligand in the extracellular milieu and then phosphorylate intracellular proteins known as Smads. Phosphorylated Smads form heterooligomers and translocate into the nucleus where they can modulate transcriptional responses. More recent studies indicate that many other proteins serve as modulators of Smad activity, and utimately define specific cellular responses to TGFbeta. Here we describe both the simplistic core TGFbeta signaling pathway and the growing number of proteins that impinge on this pathway at the level of Smad function to either enhance or inhibit TGFbeta responses.
TGF-beta signaling activates steroid hormone receptor expression during neuronal remodeling in the Drosophila brain. Metamorphosis of the Drosophila brain involves pruning of many larval-specific dendrites and axons followed by outgrowth of adult-specific processes. From a genetic mosaic screen, we recovered two independent mutations that block neuronal remodeling in the mushroom bodies (MBs). These phenotypically indistinguishable mutations affect Baboon function, a Drosophila TGF-beta/activin type I receptor, and dSmad2, its downstream transcriptional effector. We also show that Punt and Wit, two type II receptors, act redundantly in this process. In addition, knocking out dActivin around the mid-third instar stage interferes with remodeling. Binding of the insect steroid hormone ecdysone to distinct ecdysone receptor isoforms induces different metamorphic responses in various larval tissues. Interestingly, expression of the ecdysone receptor B1 isoform (EcR-B1) is reduced in activin pathway mutants, and restoring EcR-B1 expression significantly rescues remodeling defects. We conclude that the Drosophila Activin signaling pathway mediates neuronal remodeling in part by regulating EcR-B1 expression.
The Drosophila type II receptor, Wishful thinking, binds BMP and myoglianin to activate multiple TGFbeta family signaling pathways. Wishful thinking (Wit) is a Drosophila transforming growth factor-beta (TGFbeta) superfamily type II receptor most related to the mammalian bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) type II receptor, BMPRII. To better understand its function, we undertook a biochemical approach to establish the ligand binding repertoire and downstream signaling pathway. We observed that BMP4 and BMP7, bound to receptor complexes comprised of Wit and the type I receptor thickveins and saxophone to activate a BMP-like signaling pathway. Further we demonstrated that both myoglianin and its most closely related mammalian ligand, myostatin, interacted with a Wit and Baboon (Babo) type II-type I receptor complex to activate TGFbeta/activin-like signaling pathways. These results thereby demonstrate that Wit binds multiple ligands to activate both BMP and TGFbeta-like signaling pathways. Given that myoglianin is expressed in muscle and glial-derived cells, these results also suggest that Wit may mediate myoglianin-dependent signals in the nervous system.
Baboon/dSmad2 TGF-beta signaling is required during late larval stage for development of adult-specific neurons. The intermingling of larval functional neurons with adult-specific neurons during metamorphosis contributes to the development of the adult Drosophila brain. To better understand this process, we characterized the development of a dorsal cluster (DC) of Atonal-positive neurons that are born at early larval stages but do not undergo extensive morphogenesis until pupal formation. We found that Baboon(Babo)/dSmad2-mediated TGF-beta signaling, known to be essential for remodeling of larval functional neurons, is also indispensable for proper morphogenesis of these adult-specific neurons. Mosaic analysis reveals slowed development of mutant DC neurons, as evidenced by delays in both neuronal morphogenesis and atonal expression. We observe similar phenomena in other adult-specific neurons. We further demonstrate that Babo/dSmad2 operates autonomously in individual neurons and specifically during the late larval stage. Our results suggest that Babo/dSmad2 signaling prior to metamorphosis may be widely required to prepare neurons for the dynamic environment present during metamorphosis.
dSno facilitates baboon signaling in the Drosophila brain by switching the affinity of Medea away from Mad and toward dSmad2. A screen for modifiers of Dpp adult phenotypes led to the identification of the Drosophila homolog of the Sno oncogene (dSno). The dSno locus is large, transcriptionally complex and contains a recent retrotransposon insertion that may be essential for dSno function, an intriguing possibility from the perspective of developmental evolution. dSno is highly transcribed in the embryonic central nervous system and transcripts are most abundant in third instar larvae. dSno mutant larvae have proliferation defects in the optic lobe of the brain very similar to those seen in baboon (Activin type I receptor) and dSmad2 mutants. This suggests that dSno is a mediator of Baboon signaling. dSno binds to Medea and Medea/dSno complexes have enhanced affinity for dSmad2. Alternatively, Medea/dSno complexes have reduced affinity for Mad such that, in the presence of dSno, Dpp signaling is antagonized. We propose that dSno functions as a switch in optic lobe development, shunting Medea from the Dpp pathway to the Activin pathway to ensure proper proliferation. Pathway switching in target cells is a previously unreported mechanism for regulating TGFbeta signaling and a novel function for Sno/Ski family proteins.